---
title: "Surviving as Open Source These Days: Harder Than You Think"
description: "Why has it become so hard for open-source giants to survive, with many now moving away from it? Read on as we discuss the common failures in OSS models and how to avoid making those mistakes.
"
date: 2024-08-21
author: "Hunain Ahmed"
tags: ["OSS", "open-source software", "cockroachdb", "licensing"]
---

# Surviving as Open Source These Days: Harder Than You Think

## Overview

> _A well-considered open-source software model, paired with a dedicated and
> responsible community, can create the products that shape our world._

[Open-source software](https://www.daytona.io/definitions/o/open-source) has
been hailed as a force that brings people together in innovation and
democratizes access to powerful tools. However, recent trends show companies
shifting away from full
[open licenses](https://www.daytona.io/definitions/o/osslicense) toward more
restrictive, enterprise-focused models. The questions we should ask are:

- What exactly has driven changes in previously beloved open-source companies
  like Cockroach Labs and HashiCorp?
- What does this mean for the future of open-source software?
- What should tech startups learn from this?

This article explores the licensing changes in prominent OSS projects, focusing
on CockroachDB’s recent shift. We’ll discuss the motivations behind these
decisions, identify common patterns, and provide insights into what constitutes
a robust and sustainable OSS model.

## Case Study

### CockroachDB: From Open to Proprietary

CockroachDB was successful under the Apache 2.0 License from the very beginning,
which meant widespread adoption and a very lively ecosystem. The flip side of
this coin is that the openness of that license allowed CockroachDB to be
exploited by cloud providers—commercializing the software without contributing
back.

To that, Cockroach Labs decided in 2019 to switch to the Business Source
License, which had allowed the labs to continue to keep open access because the
license had a mechanism of control to balance out commercial viability. More
recently, Cockroach Labs has taken another step with its proprietary model
through the CockroachDB Software License.

This was a contentious strategic move since it was very much a critical
divergence from the project's initially open-source spirit, which had questioned
the trust of the community and the future direction of the project.

### Elasticsearch: The Battle for Control

Elasticsearch—a powerful search and analytics engine—faced similar challenges in
generating revenue and protecting its trademark. The parent company, Elastic,
even had to file a lawsuit to protect the software from being abused by cloud
providers. To make matters worse, Amazon falsely claimed a collaboration between
the two companies, according to Elastic's founder. Ultimately, Elastic made the
tough decision to change the license, adopting a dual license based on Apache
2.0 and SSPL, which compromised some open-source values.
[Read more.](https://www.elastic.co/blog/why-license-change-aws)

### Looking at the Patterns

When examining both companies, a common theme emerges: insufficient attention
was given to the type of license at launch time. This oversight leads to
surprises and unexpected challenges, forcing companies to make quick, decisive
actions that inevitably upset part of the open-source community.

## Main Reasons Behind Ditching Open Source

1. **Protection from Cloud Providers**: This is by far the most important and
   unfortunate reason. Most cloud provider giants
   [abuse the open-source nature](https://techcrunch.com/2018/11/29/the-crusade-against-open-source-abuse/)
   of these companies, profiting without giving anything in return. This leaves
   companies with few options: become proprietary or lose some part of
   open-source.

2. **Sustainability and Revenue Generation**: Most open-source projects lack a
   sustainable business model. For example, compare MySQL to MongoDB. Both are
   databases, and both are almost open-source, but MongoDB knows how to generate
   revenue while MySQL does not. This is evident in MongoDB's annual revenue of
   **[$154 M](https://growjo.com/company/MongoDB)** compared to MySQL's
   **[$37 M](https://growjo.com/company/Oracle_MySQL)**. This financial
   disparity often leads to companies either dying, getting acquired by a tech
   giant, or opting for an enterprise license.

3. **Maintaining Competitive Advantage**: While open-source licenses foster
   innovation, they can also erode a company’s competitive edge. Your competitor
   might claim to have built a service independently, but you know it's just
   your code running behind the scenes with some modifications—a tactic cloud
   providers are notorious for. By restricting certain commercial uses,
   companies can retain control over how their software is used, ensuring they
   remain competitive in the market.

4. **Community and Ecosystem Management**: A more restrictive license can help
   manage the ecosystem that develops around the software. Enterprises can set
   clear boundaries on how their software should be used, aligning development
   and usage with the company's long-term objectives.

## A Good OSS Model

By now, you should realize how crucial it is to have a well-planned open-source
software model. Let's discuss how you can
[lead your OSS to greatness](https://www.daytona.io/dotfiles/building-a-successful-open-source-project):

**Have the Perfect License**

The licensing model should support the company’s overall business strategy,
whether that’s driving adoption, generating revenue, or maintaining control over
the software’s evolution. For example, consider **Red Hat**, which uses a
dual-licensing approach. They offer their software under the GPL for community
use while maintaining a separate commercial license for enterprises needing
support and additional features. This model allows them to balance community
engagement with a solid revenue stream.
[Deciding Open-source or not](https://www.daytona.io/dotfiles/open-source-or-not)

Similarly, **MongoDB** transitioned to the Server Side Public License (SSPL) to
prevent cloud providers from exploiting their software without contributing
back. Your license choice should align with your business goals, whether it’s to
maximize adoption like with Apache 2.0 or protect commercial interests as in
SSPL.

**Adapt to Market Dynamics and Trends**

The software industry is constantly evolving, and so should your licensing
model. Be prepared to adapt your strategy as new challenges and opportunities
arise.

For example, **Redis Labs** initially released **Redis** under the BSD license,
a very permissive license that facilitated rapid adoption. However, as the
company grew and faced competition from cloud providers offering Redis as a
service, they introduced the Redis Source Available License (RSAL). This change
helped them protect their business while still fostering community use.

Remember, staying engaged in **hackathons**, **dev programs**, and
**[publishing content](https://opensource.com/article/21/10/content-marketing-open-source-community)**
on the latest trends not only keeps your project relevant but also attracts
sponsors and funding—which you really need as a startup. For instance,
**Docker** frequently updates its licensing and monetization strategies in
response to market needs, ensuring it remains a key player in containerization.

**Ensure Long-term Sustainability**

The goal of any licensing strategy should be to ensure the long-term
sustainability of the project. This includes financial viability, continued
innovation, and market relevance.

Take the example of **MySQL**, which was acquired by Sun Microsystems and later
Oracle. The dual-licensing model allowed MySQL to be freely available while
generating revenue from enterprises needing commercial support. However,
Oracle’s focus shifted more toward enterprise licensing, leading to forks like
MariaDB by the original MySQL developers.

This situation underscores the importance of a licensing strategy that adapts to
changes in ownership and market conditions to maintain project vitality. As the
famous **[Linus Torvalds](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linus_Torvalds)** likes
to say:

> In real open source, you have the right to control your own destiny.

You don’t want to discover that companies are abusing your product and making a
fortune while you, as a startup, struggle to generate a penny.

**Promote Community Engagement**

Even with more restrictive licenses, maintaining a vibrant and engaged community
is crucial. Open-source projects thrive on community contributions, which drive
innovation and improve the software. Start with a creative and skilled team of
maintainers and contributors who understand quality code.
[Building a vibrant community.](https://www.daytona.io/dotfiles/building-a-community-before-launching-your-product)

**Offer Clarity and Fairness**

The terms of the license should be clear, fair, and easy to understand.
Ambiguity can lead to mistrust or misuse, which can harm the project in the long
run. It would be a nightmare to find people exploiting loopholes that no one on
your team even noticed. Here are some
[Open Source Licenses to Avoid](https://brainhub.eu/library/open-source-licenses-to-avoid),
which you don't want for your startup.

## Final Thoughts

In the end, it's easy to be drawn toward the security of proprietary software,
but let's not forget the unparalleled power of open-source. When an entire
community rallies behind a project, incredible things happen—think **Linux**,
**Firefox**, **Blender**, or **Python**. These aren't just tools; they're the
backbone of innovation, built on the collective effort of people who believe in
something bigger than themselves. Linus Torvalds highlights this:

> I think, fundamentally, open source does tend to be more stable software. It's
> the right way to do things.

The key takeaway? A well-considered open-source software model, paired with a
dedicated and responsible community, can create the products that shape our
world. If you're building your next startup, remember that open-source isn't
just a license—it's a philosophy that, when done right, can take your project to
heights you never imagined.

Looking forward to diving into the next big topic with you!
